Let's talk about the Composition API,
the com and also some custom directives.
So we're getting into some more
advanced features in this section here.
The Composition API is brand new in Vue 3,
and a lot of times people will even say,
Vue 3 is the Composition API.
That's not true,
we're not deprecating the Options API,
which is what we've been
using all day today.
The Composition API is additive,
we're not losing anything else,
we're bringing in a new advanced feature.
Previously, we worked a lot with mixins,
a thing called mixins.
And those were kind of moving away from,
in order to work
with the Composition API more, and I'll
describe why that's such a great thing.
Before we move on into that, I do wanna
mention that Evan has a keynote about
some of the key differences that he kind
of goes through in this keynote, for
all of the things that happened when he
was kind of going from Vue 2 to Vue 3.
And at one point we wrote
everything in classes.
At one point we were thinking
about moving in a direction and
then we changed gears, and he reflects on
all of those changes and what occurred.
So you can see a timeline
of all of those events.
So, if you're interested in some of those
changes and what made things go into that,
especially things like how
RFC review process worked,
he goes into a lot of detail.
One of the things I wanted to share
with you is that this took 2years,
it's a whole rewrite, Vue 2 to Vue 3,
even though the surface API is the same.
There was 37 RFCs,
[LAUGH] 2,000 commits, and
a tremendous amount of
work in sub-projects too.
So this is just in the new repo,
and then there's also new versions
of other projects as well.
So let's talk about the Composition API.
It's a common situation, you have two
components that are pretty similar,
they share the same basic functionality,
but there's
something that's a bit different about
each of them, so you come to a crossroads.
Do I split this component into two
separate components or do I keep one
component with enough variance with
props that I can alter each one?
Enter the Composition API.
I like this quote by Michael Feathers.
Object-Oriented programming makes code
understandable by encapsulating moving
parts, functional programming makes code
understandable by minimizing moving parts.
And so in this kind of state of mind,
this is more of a functional programming
model where we're trying to encapsulate,
or we're trying to take smaller
pieces of something and making them
more available for use in other ways.
Which is why we call it the Composition
API, because we can compose it.
The Composition API allows you to
encapsulate one piece of functionality, so
you can use it in different components
throughout the application.
If written correctly,
they're pure, they don't modify or
change things outside
of the function scope.
So you'll always reliably get
the same value with the same
inputs on multiple executions.
They're also very clear
what they're returning.
You'll see this as we start to dive into
the API, but they state very clearly
what you're being given at the end,
so this can be really powerful.
The Composition API was
built off of React hooks.
So if you're familiar with React hooks,
you will feel very at home.
It was built off of that primary case,
but then it was modified for Vue and
Composition API.
When hooks first came out, this tweet
went over why this is so powerful.
So this is a React component
that's very large.
It handles a lot of different
pieces of moving parts.
And if you take all of
the different responsibilities and
you encapsulate them
into different pieces and
group them together,
this is one of the strengths of hooks and
also the Composition API,
that we're keeping like logic together.
So you're really thinking
about one thing at a time.
Also, because it's written in TypeScript,
it has extremely good TypeScript support.
So previously,
when we were working with this tacos
empty string, we said do you like tacos?
Yes or no, you're a monster.
So this should look familiar
to you at this point.
This is what this looked like,
we had the createApp, we mounted app and
we returned the empty string.
And in the HTML, we have the yes,
or the v if or v else.
If we do the same thing
with the Composition API,
what we're doing is we're
saying const ref equals Vue.
Then inside of our app,
we have this setup function.
We're saying const tacos equals ref,
and that's that empty string.
So the tacos are an empty string.
So this is, basically,
you can think of this a little bit
like what we have in data before.
But then I mentioned that we're
explicitly returning something.
We are returning tacos.
So we're very literally saying this piece
of data return this piece of data exactly.
So we know what we're getting is tacos.
If you look at the HTML,
the HTML is not different.
This part did not change at all,
what's changed is this piece.
Why are we changing?
Why is this an advanced feature and
how come we use something like this?
There's a couple of different reasons,
one is
with mixins previously,
one couldn't consume another.
So when we're working with composition,
and the reason why we call it composition,
is you can actually turn this
more into a function and
then you could have one
thing call another.
So a use case of that would be at
a certain window width you want to turn on
a type of animation that fires
only when you're on desktop.
[COUGH] So
you have one that uses the window width,
the next one that calls a particular
animation that you might use elsewhere,
and you can use it in
a bunch of different places.
So what we can do here is
also write our components.
So this is really flexible.
We can write a component this way, or
we can just create a JavaScript file that
only has this part and
not the template part.
So we can just work with
just the functionality.
If I wanted to just, and we will do that,
don't worry, where we're we're just
taking one bit of logic and we're
taking in that little bit of logic, and
it doesn't really work
with a template at all.
So what did we do?
We took this const app and data, return
tacos and we made it into this setup.
So we use set up, we say const tacos
equals ref, and that's an empty string.
We're returning tacos at the end.
So the things that are different is,
we're returning tacos,
this setup is unique to
the Composition API, and
this const tacos equals ref,
that's basically like our data.
So ref,
we use ref in the template the same, but
if we use it in a function,
we would extract it with taco.value.
So rather than using methods which hang
off of that, we've got the Vue instance
with data and methods, rather than writing
methods now, we're just writing functions.
So we've got the const count = ref(0),
we create a function
that says count.value ++.
So whatever we access in refs,
we're saying dot value,
so we create these as
functions of their own.
We can also do a thing called reactive.
Instead of declaring refs over and
over and over again,
and I'll show you a bigger
component because it can get really
repetitive to be like ref,
ref, ref, ref, ref.
We can also create something
that's called reactive,
where we can create an object that
we used like the data before.
Where we have count, and then, messages,
a string and a few other things.
So we can pass that object into reactive.
And this whole const state,
you don't have to call it state,
that's becoming a kind of normal
thing to do now with Composition API,
but you don't have to declare it as state.
But we will say const state
equals reactive count is 0.
And then if we have that same incrementer,
we're saying function increment,
and this time we're doing state.count.
So we'll do state.count instead of,
before we were finding .value off of ref.
So if we have a bigger component, let's
say, and we have const ref equals Vue.
In the setup, we have const
restaurantName, let's taco about it.
Our options are in this array.
We've got Lengua, Carnitas,
and so on and so forth.
The ref can be a number,
the ref could be another number.
The ref can be a Boolean, but we're
basically saying ref, ref, ref, ref, ref,
ref, ref, to hold the data.
Then if we wanted to increment something,
I would say numItems.
Let's say that that's the thing
that we're incrementing,
numItems.value, that's
how we get the value out.
And then at the end we're
returning all of the things,
we're returning restaurant name options,
we're even returning this function.
We're returning addItems as well.
So if we look at a code
pen that does this.
We've got our order, let's taco bout it.
And we've got our options.
Okay, so now we can add an item,
add an item, add an item.
Now, if we look at it
in the beta dev tools,
we can see the setup, we can see
all of the addItems, delivery time,
free delivery, and the numItems,
and you can see this increase.
So you can see that all in
the setup in those dev tools.
Now, these are a lot of things to create,
and then return, right?
So let's look at how we would
do this in the reactive.
We would pass in reactive, and
I'm also going to show you
something called to refs.
So we would say const
state equals reactive, and
then this should look
pretty familiar to you.
This is more similar to how we worked with
data before when we're saying data return,
where we've got the restaurant name,
the options, the numItems, and
these are all attached to an object.
So that object is just
like how we use data.
And here we've got that function,
addItems, and instead of having to
declare all of these pieces, what we
could say is toRefs and pass in state.
And that allows us to say,
pass in all of whatever's in reactive,
and this spread operator
allows us to work with
it in the templates without
saying state dot this dot dadada.
So instead of saying state.restaurantName
over and over again, state.options,
we can just use restaurantName,
options and things like that.
So If you were more
comfortable in the Options API,
or you want to see something that
looks a little bit like that in
the Composition API,
this is what that looks like.
So here we've got the same kind of thing,
and we've got this const state.
And if we open this in the dev tools, and
click on the root, you will also
see this in setup the same way.
So it's the same kind of way of working,
except now we're able to
put things in an object.